<center><h1> Duke Sites parameters and their implication in water quality </h1></center>


<center><h2>Temperature</h2></center>
<hr></hr>


<h3>Meaning<h3>

The surface temperature of the waterway.

<h3>Causes<h3>

The temperature of a river will naturally change with the time of the
year and the time of day based on the ambient temperature. Thermal
pollution, where cities discharge hot water into streams, can also lead
to sustained changes in river temperature.

<h3>Effects<h3>

The metabolic rate of aquatic life is closely linked with the
temperature of the stream. Deviations from normal temperatures can
stress aquatic life. Additionally, if the temperature is too high, water
may not be able to solubilize enough oxygen to sustain aquatic life.
Alternatively, if the temperature is too low, the immunity of fish can
decrease.

<center><h2>Turbidity</h2></center>
<hr></hr>

<h3>Meaning<h3>

Refers to water that is cloudy, muddy or opaque (turbid).

<h3>Causes<h3>

Suspended soil particles, algae, microbes, or organic matter present in
water.

<h3>Effects<h3>

These tiny particles can absorb heat and raise water temperatures,
reduce oxygen for aquatic animals, reduce native aquatic plant growth,
clog fish gills and smother fish eggs and aquatic insects.

<center><h2>Dissolved oxygen (DO)</h2></center>
<hr></hr>

<h3>Meaning<h3>
Amount of oxygen present in the water. It is essential for the survival
of aquatic organisms.

<h3>Causes<h3>

Oxygen dissolves in surface water due to the aerating action of winds.
Oxygen is also introduced into the water as a byproduct of aquatic plant
photosynthesis. The amount of oxygen that can be dissolved in water
depends on several factors, including: water temperature, the amount of
dissolved salts present in the water (salinity), and atmospheric
pressure.

<h3>Effects<h3>

When dissolved oxygen becomes too low, fish and other aquatic organisms
cannot survive.

<center><h2> Salts (Salinity/Chlrolides/Sulfates)</h2></center>
<hr></hr>

<h3>Meaning<h3>

They are minerals that dissolve in water.

<h3>Causes<h3>

Water withdrawals, road de-icing, human and industrial wastewater,
fertilizer applications, mining and oil or gas drilling, and repeated
use of irrigation water contribute to high levels of salts.

<h3>Effects<h3>

They can be toxic to freshwater plants and animals and make water
unusable for drinking, irrigation, and livestock.

<center><h2>Nutrients (nitrate, phosphate)</h2></center>
<hr></hr>

<h3>Meaning<h3>

Nitrogen and phosphorus (also called nutrients) are natural elements in
the environment that are essential for plant and animal growth in normal
amounts.

<h3>Causes<h3>

Dissolved nutrients are primarily derived from both natural and
anthropogenic sources. Most nutrient pollution comes from runoff or
discharges from fertilizing lawns and croplands, municipal waste
treatment systems, and animal wastes from livestock farming.

<h3>Effects<h3>

In excessive amounts can cause aquatic plants to grow too fast, choking
waterways, causing potentially harmful algae blooms, and creating low
oxygen conditions that can harm fish and other aquatic life.

<center><h2>Other</h2></center>
<hr></hr>

<h3>Meaning<h3>
Many more parameters are used to assess the quality of waterways such as
metals, E coli presence, pH, etc.

*Source:
<https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-08/documents/34parentattainsdescriptions.pdf>*
